Document how to change the MTU [CI SKIP] (#640)
harvester/docs: docs/networking/clusternetwork.md

#### Change the MTU of Network Config which has no Storage Network attached

You may plan to change the `MTU` of an existing `Cluster Network`. And the [Storage Network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting) is not enabled or not attached to this `Cluster Network`.

The `MTU` on each `Network Config` of an existing custom `Cluster Network` is strictly to be identical. There are many restrictions to change the `MTU`, the following steps should be followed:

1. Stop all the VMs which are attached to the target `Cluster Network`, this can be checked via the [VM Network](./harvester-network.md#create-a-vm-network) and [VM attached Secondary Network](../vm/create-vm.md#secondary-network). When any of the VMs is still running, Harvester will refuse the change.

2. Check the number of `Network Config` of the target `Cluster Network`, if the number is greater than one, then repeat the operations below until there is only one `Network Config` left:

    1. Record the `Node Selector` of a `Network Config`;

    1. Remove this `Network Config`;

3. Change the `MTU` of the last `Network Config`.

> 4. Check the `MTU` on the selected Harvester nodes via the Linux `ip link` command, the related `*-br` device should be `UP` and with the new `MTU`.

Reviewer: guess better to include the complete command for user to change the MTU on interfaces in Linux ?
Also, you can also detail step 4 on the cn-data-br instead of related -br.

```
Harvester node $ ip link

                                                  |new MTU|              |state UP|
3: cn-data-br: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 9000 qdisc noqueue state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 52:54:00:6e:5c:2a brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
```

> 5. Test the new MTU on Harvester nodes via command like `ping` to another Harvester node (with the new MTU) or an external device.

Author: Need more work on this step, there is no IP, no VID on this bridge/bonding interface yet; not possible to `ping` now.

Reviewer: Can you add some example including vlan config and cluster network spanning all nodes or selected nodes.
And which interfaces need change in MTU setting based on vlanconfig MTU change.I believe this can help the users understand better.Thanks

To simplify cluster maintenance, create one network configuration for each node or group of nodes. Without dedicated network configurations, certain maintenance tasks (for example, replacing old NICs with NICs in different slots) will require you to stop and/or migrate the affected VMs before updating the network configuration.

:::

### How to Change the Network Config

Changes on the existing `Network Config` may affect both the Harvester VMs/workloads and the external devices/systems like Switches/Routers. For more information, please see [Network Topology](./deep-dive.md#network-topology).

Suppose a `Cluster Network` `cn-data` has been built with `MTU` value `1500`. And you plan to change the `MTU` value to `9000`.

![](/img/v1.4/networking/set-a-new-mtu-value.png)

#### Change the MTU of Network Config which has no Storage Network attached

The [Storage Network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting) is not enabled or not attached to this `Cluster Network`.

The `MTU` on each `Network Config` of an existing custom `Cluster Network` is strictly to be identical. There are many restrictions to change the `MTU`, the following steps should be followed:

> 1. Stop all the VMs which are attached to the target `Cluster Network`, this can be checked via the [VM Network](./harvester-network.md#create-a-vm-network) and [VM attached Secondary Network](../vm/create-vm.md#secondary-network). When any of the VMs is still running, Harvester will refuse the change.
> 
> 2. Check the number of `Network Config` of the target `Cluster Network`, if the number is greater than one, then repeat the operations below until there is only one `Network Config` left:
> 
>     1. Record the `Node Selector` of a `Network Config`;
> 
>     1. Remove this `Network Config`;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Stop all virtual machines that are attached to the target cluster network.

  You can check this using the [VM network](./harvester-network.md#create-a-vm-network) and any [secondary networks](../vm/create-vm.md#secondary-network) you may have used. Harvester does not allow you to change the MTU when any of the connected virtual machines are still running.

1. Check the network configurations of the target cluster network.

  If multiple network configurations exist, record the node selector for each and remove configurations until only one remains.
```

> 3. Change the `MTU` of the last `Network Config`.
> 
> 4. Check the `MTU` on the selected Harvester nodes via the Linux `ip link` command, the related `*-br` device like `cn-data-br` should be `UP` and with the new `MTU`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the MTU was changed using the Linux `ip link` command. If the network configuration selects multiple Harvester nodes, run the command on each node.
  
  The output must show the new MTU of the related `*-br` device and the state `UP`. In the following example, the device is `cn-data-br` and the new MTU is `9000`.
```

```
Harvester node $ ip link show dev cn-data-br

                                                  |new MTU|              |state UP|
3: cn-data-br: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 9000 qdisc noqueue state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 52:54:00:6e:5c:2a brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please indent this code block.

> :::note
> 
> 1. When the state is `UNKNOWN`, a possible cause is the MTU does not match between Harvester and external Switch/Router.
> 
> 2. If current `Network Config` selects more than one node, then repeat step 4 on each node.
> 
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :::note

  When the state is `UNKNOWN`, it is likely that the MTU values on Harvester and the external switch or router do not match.

  :::
```

Reviewer 2: I moved the first point to the step description.

> 5. Test the new MTU on Harvester nodes via command like `ping` to another Harvester node (with the new MTU) or an external IP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Test the new MTU on Harvester nodes using commands such as `ping`. You must send the messages to a Harvester node with the new MTU or a node with an external IP.

  Example:
```

```
Suppose a CIDR `192.168.100.0/24` and gateway `192.168.100.1` is prepared for the cn-data network.

1. Set an IP 192.168.100.100 on bridge device

$ ip addr add dev cn-data-br 192.168.100.100/24

2. Add a route for destination IP like `8.8.8.8` via the gateway

$ ip route add 8.8.8.8 via 192.168.100.1 dev cn-data-br

3. ping 8.8.8.8 from the new IP 192.168.100.100

$ ping 8.8.8.8 -I 192.168.100.100
PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8) from 192.168.100.100 : 56(84) bytes of data.
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=1 ttl=59 time=8.52 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=2 ttl=59 time=8.90 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=3 ttl=59 time=8.74 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=4 ttl=59 time=9.19 ms

4. ping with different size to validate new MTU

$ ping 8.8.8.8 -s 8800 -I 192.168.100.100

PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8) from 192.168.100.100 : 8800(8828) bytes of data

# the `-s` specify the ping packet size, which can test if the new MTU really works

5. Remove the added test route

$ ip route delete 8.8.8.8 via 192.168.100.1 dev cn-data-br

6. Remove the added test ip

$ ip addr delete 192.168.100.100/24 dev cn-data-br

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please indent this code block.

> 6. Add those `Network Config` which were removed on Step 2, each should set the `MTU` to the new value. And run step 4, 5 to test and verify the new `MTU`.
> 
> 7. Change all the `Virtual Machine Network` which are attached to the current clusternetwork like `cn-data` manually.
> 
> Click the `Edit Yaml` of `vm100`.
> 
> ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-networks.png)
> 
> Change the MTU to new value and save.
> 
> ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-network-mtu.png)
> 
> Change all other related `Virtual Machine Network`.
> 
> You may also change the MTU via `kubectl` like `kubectl edit NetworkAttachmentDefinition.k8s.cni.cncf.io vm100`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add back the network configurations that you removed, change the MTU in each one, and verify that the new MTU was applied.

1. Edit the YAML of all virtual machine networks that are attached to the target cluster network.

  On the Harvester UI **Virtual Machine Networks** screen, perform the following steps for each attached network:

  1. Select **⋮ > Edit YAML**.

    ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-networks.png)

  1. Change the MTU.
  
    ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-network-mtu.png)

  1. Click **Save**.

  You can also use `kubectl` to change the MTU. In the following example, the network name is `vm100`. To edit the YAML of this network, run the command `kubectl edit NetworkAttachmentDefinition.k8s.cni.cncf.io vm100`.
```

```
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    network.harvesterhci.io/route: '{"mode":"auto","serverIPAddr":"","cidr":"","gateway":""}'
  creationTimestamp: '2025-04-25T10:21:01Z'
  finalizers:
    - wrangler.cattle.io/harvester-network-nad-controller
    - wrangler.cattle.io/harvester-network-manager-nad-controller
  generation: 1
  labels:
    network.harvesterhci.io/clusternetwork: cn-data
    network.harvesterhci.io/ready: 'true'
    network.harvesterhci.io/type: L2VlanNetwork
    network.harvesterhci.io/vlan-id: '100'
  name: vm100
  namespace: default
  resourceVersion: '1525839'
  uid: 8dacf415-ce90-414a-a11b-48f041d46b42
spec:
  config: >-
    {"cniVersion":"0.3.1","name":"vm100","type":"bridge","bridge":"cn-data-br","promiscMode":true,"vlan":100,"ipam":{},"mtu":1500}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please indent this code block.

> 8. Start the VMs mentioned in step 1, they will inheriate the new `MTU`. Validate the `MTU` from the VM's OS via command like Linux `ip link`.
> 
> 9. You need to check the workloads on the VM to make sure they also work upon the new `MTU`, it is out of scope of Harvester.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Start all virtual machines that are attached to the target cluster network.

  The virtual machines should have inherited the new MTU. You can verify this in the guest operating system using the Linux `ip link` command.
  
1. Verify that the virtual machine workloads are running normally.

:::info important

Harvester cannot be held responsible for any damage or loss of data that may occur when the MTU value is changed.

:::
```

:::note

- The `MTU` affects both of the Harvester nodes and the infrastructure networking devices like Switches and Routers, the careful planning and testing are required to ensure the new `MTU`. For more information, please see [Network Topology](./deep-dive.md#network-topology).

- The `MTU` on the existing `Virtual Machine Network` needs to be updated manually.

- Service is interrupted while the whole process.

- This method does not work on the built-in `mgmt Cluster Network`.

> :::

Reviewer 2: Please remove this. The note is now part of the section introduction.

> #### Change the MTU of Network Config which has Storage Network Attached
> 
> The [Storage Network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting) is enabled or attached to this `Cluster Network`. The `Storage Network` is dedicatedly used by `Longhorn`, the default CSI driver of Harvester cluster. Because the `Longhorn` is responsible for at least the [root disk](../vm/create-vm.md#volumes) of all VMs, this change will affect all the VMs.
> 
> The `MTU` on each `Network Config` of an existing custom `Cluster Network` is strictly to be identical. There are many restrictions to change the `MTU`, the following steps should be followed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Change the MTU of Network Configuration with an Attached Storage Network

In this scenario, the [storage network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting) is enabled and attached to the target cluster network.

The storage network is used by `driver.longhorn.io`, which is Harvester's default CSI driver. Longhorn is responsible for provisioning [root volumes](../vm/create-vm.md#volumes), so changing the MTU affects all virtual machines.

:::caution

- The MTU affects Harvester nodes and networking devices such as switches and routers. Careful planning and testing are required to ensure that changing the MTU does not adversely affect the system. For more information, see [Network Topology](./deep-dive.md#network-topology).
- You must use the same MTU across all network configurations of a custom cluster network. You must also manually update the MTU on existing virtual machine networks.
- All cluster operations are interrupted during the configuration change.
- The information in this section does not apply to the built-in `mgmt` cluster network.

:::

If you must change the MTU, perform the following steps:
```

> 1. Stop all the VMs.
> 
> 2. Disable the Harvester [Storage Network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting). Wait and [Verify Configuration is Completed](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#verify-configuration-is-completed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Stop all virtual machines.

1. Disable the Harvester [storage network setting](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting).

  Allow some time for the setting to be disabled, and then [verify that the change was applied](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#verify-configuration-is-completed).
```

> 3. Check the number of `Network Config` of the target `Cluster Network`, if the number is greater than one, then repeat the operations below until there is only one `Network Config` left:
> 
>     1. Record the `Node Selector` of a `Network Config`;
> 
>     1. Remove this `Network Config`;
> 
> 4. Change the `MTU` of the last `Network Config`.
> 
> ::: note
> 
> The MUT on the peer external Switch/Router's port needs to be changed accordingly.
> 
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Check the network configurations of the target cluster network.

  If multiple network configurations exist, record the node selector for each and remove configurations until only one remains.

1. Change the MTU of the remaining network configuration.

  :::info important

  You must also change the MTU on the peer external switch or router.

  :::
```

> 5. Check the `MTU` on the selected Harvester nodes via the Linux `ip link` command, the related `*-br` device like `cn-data-br` should be `UP` and with the new `MTU`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Verify that the MTU was changed using the Linux `ip link` command. If the network configuration selects multiple Harvester nodes, run the command on each node.
  
  The output must show the new MTU of the related `*-br` device and the state `UP`. In the following example, the device is `cn-data-br` and the new MTU is `9000`.
```

```
Harvester node $ ip link show dev cn-data-br

                                                  |new MTU|              |state UP|

3: cn-data-br: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 9000 qdisc noqueue state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 52:54:00:6e:5c:2a brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please indent this code block.

> :::note
> 
> 1. When the state is `UNKNOWN`, a possible cause is the MTU does not match between Harvester and external Switch/Router.
> 
> 2. If current `Network Config` selects more than one node, then repeat step 5 on each node.
> 
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :::note

  When the state is `UNKNOWN`, it is likely that the MTU values on Harvester and the external switch or router do not match.

  :::
```

> 6. Test the new MTU on Harvester nodes via command like `ping` to another Harvester node (with the new MTU) or an external IP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Test the new MTU on Harvester nodes using commands such as `ping`. You must send the messages to a Harvester node with the new MTU or to a node with an external IP.

  Example:
```

```
Suppose a CIDR `192.168.100.0/24` and gateway `192.168.100.1` is prepared for the cn-data network.

1. Set an IP 192.168.100.100 on bridge device

$ ip addr add dev cn-data-br 192.168.100.100/24

2. Add a route for destination IP like `8.8.8.8` via the gateway

$ ip route add 8.8.8.8 via 192.168.100.1 dev cn-data-br

3. ping 8.8.8.8 from the new IP 192.168.100.100

$ ping 8.8.8.8 -I 192.168.100.100
PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8) from 192.168.100.100 : 56(84) bytes of data.
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=1 ttl=59 time=8.52 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=2 ttl=59 time=8.90 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=3 ttl=59 time=8.74 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=4 ttl=59 time=9.19 ms

4. ping with different size to validate new MTU

$ ping 8.8.8.8 -s 8800 -I 192.168.100.100

PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8) from 192.168.100.100 : 8800(8828) bytes of data

# the `-s` specify the ping packet size, which can test if the new MTU really works

5. Remove the added test route

$ ip route delete 8.8.8.8 via 192.168.100.1 dev cn-data-br

6. Remove the added test ip

$ ip addr delete 192.168.100.100/24 dev cn-data-br

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please indent this code block.

> 7. Add those `Network Config` which were removed on Step 3, each should set the `MTU` to the new value. And run step 5, 6 to test and verify the new `MTU`.
> 
> 8. Enable and set the Harvester [Storage Network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting), note the [Prerequisites](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#prerequisites) are met in the above steps. Wait and [Verify Configuration is Completed](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#verify-configuration-is-completed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add back the network configurations that you removed, change the MTU in each one, and verify that the new MTU was applied.

1. Enable and configure the Harvester [storage network setting](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting), ensuring that the [prerequisites](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#prerequisites) are met.

  Allow some time for the setting to be disabled, and then [verify that the change was applied](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#verify-configuration-is-completed).
```

> 9. Change all the `Virtual Machine Network` which are attached to the current clusternetwork like `cn-data` manually.
> 
> Click the `Edit Yaml` of `vm100`.
> 
> ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-networks.png)
> 
> Change the `MTU` to new value and save.
> 
> ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-network-mtu.png)
> 
> Change all other related `Virtual Machine Network`.
> 
> You may also change the MTU via `kubectl` like `kubectl edit NetworkAttachmentDefinition.k8s.cni.cncf.io vm100`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Edit the YAML of all virtual machine networks that are attached to the target cluster network.

  On the Harvester UI **Virtual Machine Networks** screen, perform the following steps for each attached network:

  1. Select **⋮ > Edit YAML**.

    ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-networks.png)

  1. Change the MTU.
  
    ![](/img/v1.4/networking/edit-vm-network-mtu.png)

  1. Click **Save**.

  You can also use `kubectl` to change the MTU. In the following example, the network name is `vm100`. To edit the YAML of this network, run the command `kubectl edit NetworkAttachmentDefinition.k8s.cni.cncf.io vm100`.
```

```
apiVersion: k8s.cni.cncf.io/v1
kind: NetworkAttachmentDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    network.harvesterhci.io/route: '{"mode":"auto","serverIPAddr":"","cidr":"","gateway":""}'
  creationTimestamp: '2025-04-25T10:21:01Z'
  finalizers:
    - wrangler.cattle.io/harvester-network-nad-controller
    - wrangler.cattle.io/harvester-network-manager-nad-controller
  generation: 1
  labels:
    network.harvesterhci.io/clusternetwork: cn-data
    network.harvesterhci.io/ready: 'true'
    network.harvesterhci.io/type: L2VlanNetwork
    network.harvesterhci.io/vlan-id: '100'
  name: vm100
  namespace: default
  resourceVersion: '1525839'
  uid: 8dacf415-ce90-414a-a11b-48f041d46b42
spec:
  config: >-
    {"cniVersion":"0.3.1","name":"vm100","type":"bridge","bridge":"cn-data-br","promiscMode":true,"vlan":100,"ipam":{},"mtu":1500}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please indent this code block.

> 10. Start the VMs mentioned in step 1, they will inheriate the new `MTU`. Validate the `MTU` from the VM's OS via command like Linux `ip link`.
> 
> 11. You need to check the workloads on the VM to make sure they also work upon the new `MTU`, it is out of scope of Harvester.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Start all virtual machines that are attached to the target cluster network.

  The virtual machines should have inherited the new MTU. You can verify this from the guest operating system using the Linux `ip link` command.
  
1. Verify that the virtual machine workloads are running normally.

:::info important

Harvester cannot be held responsible for any damage or loss of data that may occur when the MTU value is changed.

:::
```

:::note

- The `MTU` affects both of the Harvester nodes and the infrastructure networking devices like Switches and Routers, the careful planning and testing are required to ensure the new `MTU`. For more information, please see [Network Topology](./deep-dive.md#network-topology).

- The `MTU` on the existing `Virtual Machine Network` needs to be updated manually.

- Service is interrupted while the whole process.

- This method does not work on the built-in `mgmt Cluster Network`.

> :::

Reviewer 2: Please remove this. The note is now part of the section introduction.

The following sections outline the steps you must perform to change the MTU of a network configuration. The sample cluster network used in these sections has `cn-data` that was built with an MTU value of `1500` and plans be changed to `9000`.

![](/img/v1.4/networking/set-a-new-mtu-value.png)

#### Change the MTU of a Network Configuration with No Attached Storage Network

In this scenario, the [storage network](../advanced/storagenetwork.md#harvester-storage-network-setting) is neither enabled nor attached to the target cluster network.

:::caution

- The MTU affects Harvester nodes and networking devices such as switches and routers. Careful planning and testing are required to ensure that changing the MTU does not adversely affect the system. For more information, see [Network Topology](./deep-dive.md#network-topology).
- You must use the same MTU across all network configurations of a custom cluster network. You must also manually update the MTU on existing virtual machine networks.
- Cluster operations are interrupted during the configuration change.

> - The information in this section does not apply to the built-in `mgmt` cluster network.

Reviewer: I came across some customers who has already configured mtu values > 1500 on their clusters on mgmt interface.
I am not sure if they are following some documentation for this.Currently we do not have configuration option on mgmt cluster from UI.Do you think we need to provide information in this doc to use "ip link commands" to change MTU values on interfaces using mgmt cluster network on all nodes on cluster.

Author: `mgmt` is a special case and not covered in this PR

`mgmt` clusternetwork does not have `vlanconfig`; we need to unify the lifecycle management of it with others as more as possible.

now, `mgmt` MTU is set when installation,  if user really wants to change it on day2, the `/oem` file is the solution.

To simplify cluster maintenance, create one network configuration for each node or group of nodes. Without dedicated network configurations, certain maintenance tasks (for example, replacing old NICs with NICs in different slots) will require you to stop and/or migrate the affected VMs before updating the network configuration.

:::

### Change a Network Configuration

Changes to existing network configurations may affect Harvester virtual machines and workloads, and external devices such as switches and routers. For more information, see [Network Topology](./deep-dive.md#network-topology).

> The following sections outline the steps you must perform to change the MTU of a network configuration. The sample cluster network used in these sections has `cn-data` that was built with an MTU value of `1500` and plans be changed to `9000`.

Reviewer 2: > plans be changed

This is not grammatically correct. If "must be changed" is too strong, we can use "is intended to be changed".

> The following sections outline the steps you must perform to change the MTU of a network configuration. The sample cluster network used in these sections has `cn-data` that was built with an MTU value of `1500` and plans be changed to `9000`.

Author: Updated. It was missed before, thanks.
